Abstract
========
Increasingly, clinical psychological practice sits at the intersection of socially implementable policies, and emerging neuroscience. In just a decade, advances in neuroimaging and mathematics have yielded wildly different understandings about the actual mechanism of disease in the brain compared to what is taught to students in introductory classes. The 5th edition of Diagnostic and Statistical Manual is a fantastic resource for first-year psychology students, and the text around which many classes are structured. However, it lacks critical information about the actual etiology of disease processes. I wanted to write an introductory level primer on the paradigms motivating the study of network neuroscience, the study of the brain as a dynamical system, and begin to create the infrastructure for Southern psychology students to work with brain data. Even if the DSM-5 can accurately categorize mental illness at the social scale, the next generation of mental health treatments will depend on clinicians - the people actually interacting with clients - gaining an intuition about the way disease actually occurs at the scale of the brain, rather than the way it is labeled. I want this course to be approachable enough to be exciting, and clear enough to help new students understand that even our best models of mental illness are ultimately imperfect tools we can nonetheless use to help those in need. As the lines between psychology and neuroscience become increasingly blurred, it’s imperative that psychology students are receiving the skills they will need to compassionately bridge the world of hard science and caregiving.
