What is a complex system?
===

The brain is commonly understood to be a system. Often, a general definition of a system is eschewed in favor of defining the specifics of the brain. But the general definition of a system can help us understand a lot of important properties of the brain. From biology to pop psychology, we talk about the "nervous system," without an appreciation of what a system actually is. A system is simply "a regularly interacting or interdependent group of items forming a unified whole” (Webster, 2025). A system arises when many individual components begin to interact with themselves. When this process of self interaction occurs in a particular way, a "complex" system emerges. In everyday language, complex is synonymous with complicated or difficult to understand. In science, "complex" simply means that a system is not quite fully ordered (like the periodic structure of a crystal), nor is it fully random (like the chaotic nature of the weather). Systems that are neither fully predictable nor fully chaotic share several interesting properties. These systems tend to emerge from energy differences in their medium, form special structures at the boundaries of those differences to dissipate the energy, and in so doing maintain their form despite changing their content. The world is in flux. Things that remain constant are only changing on a timescale too slow for us to notice. In a world of change, stability might seem counterintuitive.

Even though the individual rules that each part of the system follows might be simple and well understood, together, the way in which all the parts interact with each other gives rise to behavior at the level of the system that has different properties than its parts. This is called emergent behavior. Simply, a complex system is any system that is more than the sum of its parts - it is the relationship between its parts and how it evolves over time because of different rules at different scales. If this introduction has seemed general, it is because complex systems form everywhere, across many different media. A cell is a complex system that forms at the chemical gradient of its membrane, dissipates energy into its surroundings, and displays emergent behavior difficult to predict from simple chemistry alone. An economy is a complex system that forms at the gradient between supply and demand, and is notoriously difficult to predict. Physical processes like electromagnetic fields, biological processes like metabolism, and even social processes like community are all complex systems, despite being made of different "stuff." This is because the study of complexity is the study of relationships, not the study of objects. Whether it is atoms in a glass of water or birds in a flock, the rules that determine how many self-interacting objects behave are the same (Capra 1996).

