Dimensionality & the DSM
=============================

We can comprehensively image individual neurons and populations of neurons up to about 10,000 in animals and people (Manley et. al. 2024). To image the whole brain, we must sacrifice the ability to see neurons individually and instead view them in aggregate. This is akin to taking off in a plane, and watching the individual cars on the roads below vanish into chains of traffic, that might reveal critical trends about the motion of people across a city, but lose out on the path of any individual vehicle. This means a central goal of neuroscience has been dimensionality reduction. Sometimes, if you understand the simple rules underlying the relationship between two variables, it becomes easy to make educated guesses - predictions - about how they relate. The rules of these predictions are sometimes simpler than the rules of the relationship itself. When crossing the street, you can watch for every car, or, you can simply watch for the changing walk signal. When predicting the weather, you can forecast the motions of many masses of air and moisture, or, you can simply check the calendar and refer to what you know to be likely for that time of year. 

In many ways, the computations performed by the brain are akin to a foreign language. You don’t have to speak the language to be affected by the outcome of the conversation when it’s about you. In this way, even if we don’t understand the rules populations of neurons use to fire, we can understand critical markers of incipient actions. This is akin to being able to pick up one or two “signal words” when learning a new language. For a naive speaker in a restaurant, a conversation about food would be relatively easy to understand, because each ingredient, technique, or flavor serves as an anchor point that can be commonly described. A conversation about their dining partner’s family might not be so easily interpretable, because there are no common, tangible objects or processes to link to words. 

Historically, neuroscientists have run experiments predicated on the ability to link the brain’s “signal worlds,” in reality, characteristic patterns of electrical activity, to real-world actions. Why actions? It is easier to see another creature act than it is to see it think. Actions are clear reference points that are far less ambiguous than brain signals. When we talk about ambiguity, we are really talking about dimensionality: when the cause-and-effect chain is shorter, it is easier to understand. An arm can move in three dimensions, not ten thousand, and the rules of how that arm moves are well understood. In the neuroscience parlance, actions occur in a lower dimensional space than the motivation, emotion, and cognition that surrounds them.

**This brings us to the central point that the DSM-5 is operating at a different scale than the scale at which disease processes actually occur in the brain.** This doesn’t mean the DSM-5 is inaccurate, recall, as we discussed, simple rules can sometimes predict complex behavior. This does, however, mean that the DSM-5 is not in and of itself a complete paradigm for understanding or treating mental illness.
